---
layout: paper
title:  "[arXiv] SalUn: Empowering machine unlearning via gradient-based weight saliency in both image classification and generation."
date: 2023-11-01 21:00:00
author: "   
        <a style='color: #dfebf7' href='https://a-f1.github.io/'>Chongyu Fan</a><sup>[1]</sup>*,
        <a style='color: #dfebf7' href='https://ljcc0930.github.io/'>Jiancheng Liu</a><sup>[1]</sup>*,
        <a style='color: #dfebf7' href='https://www.yihua-zhang.com/'>Yihua Zhang</a><sup>[1]</sup>,
        <a style='color: #dfebf7' href='https://sites.google.com/site/dennislwei/'>Dennis Wei</a><sup>[2]</sup>,
        <a style='color: #dfebf7' href='https://riceric22.github.io//'>Eric Wong</a><sup>[3]</sup>,
        <a style='color: #dfebf7' href='https://lsjxjtu.github.io/'>Sijia Liu</a><sup>[1,2]</sup>
        "
affiliation: "<sup>[1]</sup>Michigan State University, <sup>[2]</sup>IBM Research, <sup>[3]</sup>University of Pennsylvania"
code: "https://github.com/OPTML-Group/Unlearn-Saliency"
paper: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12508"
categories: "arXiv"
---

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/posts/salun_iclr23/salun.png" title="overview of salun" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption" style="color: #999; font-size:16px; padding: 2px;">
    Figure 1. Schematic overview of comparing conventional unlearning methods with our proposal (SalUn) in the context of mitigating the influence of the harmful concept of ‘nudity’ in DM.
</div>

## Abstract
With evolving data regulations, machine unlearning (MU) has become an important tool for fostering trust and safety in today’s AI models. However, existing MU methods focusing on data and/or weight perspectives often grapple with limitations in unlearning accuracy, stability, and cross-domain applicability. To address these challenges, we introduce the concept of ‘weight saliency’ in MU, drawing parallels with input saliency in model explanation. This innovation directs MU’s attention toward specific model weights rather than the entire model, improving effectiveness and efficiency. The resultant method that we call saliency unlearning (SalUn) narrows the performance gap with ‘exact’ unlearning (model retraining from scratch after removing the forgetting dataset). To the best of our knowledge, SalUn is the first principled MU approach adaptable enough to effectively erase the influence of forgetting data, classes, or concepts in both image classification and generation. For example, SalUn yields a stability advantage in high-variance random data forgetting, e.g., with a 0.2% gap compared to exact unlearning on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Moreover, in preventing conditional diffusion models from generating harmful images, SalUn achieves nearly 100% unlearning accuracy, outperforming current state-of-the-art baselines like Erased Stable Diffusion and Forget-Me-Not.


<!-- ## Our Proposed Question
<center>
<b>
Is there a principled approach for effective MU in both classification and generation tasks?
</b>
<br>
</center> -->

<!-- ## SalUn: Weight Saliency Is Possibly All You Need for MU -->
## Gradient-based weight saliency map
we utilize the gradient of a forgetting loss (denoted as $$\ell_{\mathrm{f}}(\boldsymbol{\theta}; \mathcal{D}_\mathrm{f})$$) with respect to the model weights variable $$\boldsymbol{\theta}$$ under the forgetting dataset $$\mathcal{D}_\mathrm{f}$$. By applying a hard thresholding operation, we can then obtain the desired weight saliency map:

$$
    \mathbf m_{\mathrm{S}}   = \mathbf 1 \left ( \left |  \nabla_{\boldsymbol{\theta}} \ell_{\mathrm{f}} (\boldsymbol{\theta}; \mathcal{D}_\mathrm{f}) \left . \right |_{\boldsymbol{\theta} = \boldsymbol{\theta}_{\mathrm{o}} } \right  | \geq  \gamma \right )
$$

 where $$ \mathbf 1 (\mathbf g \geq \gamma ) $$ is an element-wise indicator function which yields a value of $$1$$ for the $$i$$-th element if $$ g_i \geq \gamma $$ and $$ 0 $$ otherwise, $$|\cdot| $$ is an element-wise absolute value operation, and $$\gamma > 0$$ is a hard threshold. In practice, we have observed that setting $$\gamma$$ to the median of the gradient vector  $$\nabla_{\boldsymbol{\theta}} \ell_{\mathrm{f}} (\boldsymbol{\theta}; \mathcal{D}_\mathrm{f}) \left . \right |_{\boldsymbol{\theta} = \boldsymbol{\theta}_{\mathrm{o}} }$$ is a sufficiently effective choice.  We express the unlearning model $$\boldsymbol{\theta}_\mathrm{u}$$ as

<!-- $$
  \hat{\epsilon}_{\boldsymbol{\theta}}(\mathbf x_t | c) = (1-w) {\epsilon}_{\boldsymbol{\theta}}(\mathbf x_t | \emptyset ) + w {\epsilon}_{\boldsymbol{\theta}}(\mathbf x_t | c )
$$ -->



$$
    \boldsymbol{\theta}_\mathrm{u} = \underbrace{\mathbf m_{\mathrm{S}} \odot \boldsymbol{\theta}}_\text{salient weights} + \underbrace{ (\mathbf 1 - \mathbf m_{\mathrm{S}}) \odot \boldsymbol{\theta}_{\mathrm{o}} }_\text{original weights}
$$


## Saliency-based unlearning (SalUn)
We introduce SalUn, which incorporates the saliency-aware unlearning variables $$\boldsymbol{\theta}\mathrm{u}$$  into the unlearning process.
One  advantage of SalUn is its plug-and-play capability, allowing it to be applied on top of existing unlearning methods. 
In particular, we find that integrating weight saliency with the Random Labeling method provides a promising MU solution.

In image classification, Random Labeling assigns a random image label to a forgetting data point and then fine-tunes the model on the randomly labeled $$\mathcal{D}_\mathrm{f}$$. In SalUn, we leverage the idea of Random Labeling to update $$\boldsymbol{\theta}\mathrm{u}$$. This gives rise to the following optimization problem associated with SalUn for image classification:

<!-- $$
     \text{Classification: } \ell_\mathrm{f} (\boldsymbol{\theta} ; \mathcal D_\mathrm{f}) = \mathbb E_{(\mathbf x, y) \sim \mathcal D_\mathrm{f}} [ \ell_{\mathrm{CE}}(\boldsymbol{\theta}; \mathbf x ,y)]
$$

$$
     \text{Generation: } \ell_\mathrm{f} (\boldsymbol{\theta} ; \mathcal D_\mathrm{f}) =   \ell_\mathrm{MSE}(\boldsymbol{\theta}; \mathcal D_\mathrm{f})
$$ -->


$$
    \min_\mathbf{\theta_\mathrm{u}} ~ L_\text{SalUn}^{(1)} (\boldsymbol{\theta_\mathrm{u}}) \mathrel{\mathop:}=  \mathbb E_{(\mathbf x, y) \sim \mathcal{D}_\mathrm{f}, y^\prime \neq y} \left [ \ell_\mathrm{CE}(\boldsymbol{\theta_\mathrm{u}}; \mathbf x, y^\prime) \right ]
$$


Furthermore, we extend the use of Radom Labeling to the image generation context within SalUn. In this context, Radom Labeling is implemented by associating the image of the forgetting concept with a misaligned concept. To maintain the image-generation capability of the DM, we also introduce the MSE loss  on the remaining dataset $$\mathcal{D}_\mathrm{r}$$ as a regularization. This leads to  the   optimization problem of SalUn for image generation:

$$
    \min_\mathbf{\theta_\mathrm{u}} ~  L_\text{SalUn}^{(2)} (\boldsymbol{\theta}_\mathrm{u}) \mathrel{\mathop:}=  \mathbb{E}_{(\mathbf x, c) \sim \mathcal D_\mathrm{f}, t, \epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0,1), c^\prime \neq c  } \left [ \| \epsilon_\mathbf{\theta_\mathrm{u}}(\mathbf x_t | c^\prime) - \epsilon_\mathbf{\theta_\mathrm{u}}(\mathbf x_t | c) \|_2^2 \right ] + \alpha \ell_\mathrm{MSE}(\mathbf{\theta}_\mathrm{u}; \mathcal D_\mathrm{r})
$$

## Experiments
<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/posts/salun_iclr23/tab1.jpg" title="overview of salun" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/posts/salun_iclr23/fig4.jpg" title="overview of salun" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/posts/salun_iclr23/fig6.jpg" title="overview of salun" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>